---
title: "Hello, Git!"
description: An introductory guide to getting started with Git.
author: faizan
date: 2025-09-04 15:43:25 +0300
categories: [Guide, Software Development]
tags: [git, guide, software-development, version-control-system]
image:
  path: /assets/img/posts/hello-git/featured-image.png
  thumb: /assets/img/posts/hello-git/featured-image-thumbnail.png
  lqip: /assets/img/posts/hello-git/featured-image-thumbnail.png
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD036 -->

The [**previous article**](/posts/what-is-git/) explains what Git is and its
key features. Now, let's try to do some hands-on with Git. This article will
walk through the basics of getting started with Git, including installation,
configuration, and some fundamental commands.

## Installation

To get started with Git, the first step is to install it on the machine. Git is
available for various operating systems, including Linux, macOS, and Windows.

### Linux

On many Linux distributions, Git comes pre-installed. If not, it can be
installed using the package manager specific to the distribution.

Here is how to install Git on some common Linux distributions by using terminal:

#### Ubuntu

```shell
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install git
```

#### Debian

```shell
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install git
```

#### Fedora

```shell
sudo dnf install git
```

#### Arch Linux

```shell
sudo pacman -S git
```

<blockquote class="prompt-info" markdown="1">

**INFO**

For other Linux distributions and methods, refer to
[**Download for Linux and Unix**](https://git-scm.com/downloads/linux) page on
the official Git website for detailed instructions.

</blockquote>

### macOS

On macOS, Git can be installed using Homebrew, a popular package manager for
macOS.

<blockquote class="prompt-info" markdown="1">

**INFO**

If Homebrew is not already installed on the system then it can be installed by
following the instructions on the official Homebrew website:
**<https://brew.sh/>**.

</blockquote>

If Homebrew is already installed then Git can be installed by running the
following command in the terminal:

```shell
brew install git
```

<blockquote class="prompt-info" markdown="1">

**INFO**

Alternatively, Git can also be installed on macOS by a variety of other methods.
Refer to [**Download for macOS**](https://git-scm.com/download/mac) page on the
official Git website for more information.

</blockquote>

### Windows

On Windows, the easiest way to install Git is by using the official installer.
Download the installer from the official Git website:
**<https://git-scm.com/download/win>** and follow the installation instructions.

<blockquote class="prompt-info" markdown="1">

**INFO**

Similarly, Git can also be installed on Windows by a variety of other methods.
All these methods are also explained on the above link.

</blockquote>

## Verification for Installation

After installation, it can be verified that Git is installed correctly by
running following command in the terminal in case of Linux and macOS:

```shell
git --version
```

While in case of Windows, Git can be verified by opening "Git Bash" (which is
installed along with Git) and running the same command.

This should display the installed version of Git.

<blockquote class="prompt-info" markdown="1">

**INFO**

There are various GUI tools available for Git, such as
[**GitKraken**](https://www.gitkraken.com),
[**SourceTree**](https://www.sourcetreeapp.com),
[**GitHub Desktop**](https://github.com/apps/desktop), and others as listed on
[**GUI Clients**](https://git-scm.com/downloads/guis) page on the official Git
website. However, Git is primarily a command-line tool, and for learning it is
recommended to get familiar with the command line interface first.

Git CLI can be used with terminal applications like terminal emulators on Linux
and macOS or using Git Bash on Windows.

</blockquote>

## Configuration

Before using Git, it is recommended to configure some basic settings, such as
the user name and email address. This information will be associated with the
commits made using Git.

The user name and email address can be configured by running the following
command:

```shell
git config --global user.name "Adam"
git config --global user.email "adam@example.com"
```

The `--global` flag ensures that these settings apply to all repositories on the
system. If it is required to set different user name and email address for a
specific repository, this can be done by running the same commands without the
`--global` flag while being inside that repository.

The configuration settings can be verified by running the following command:

```shell
git config --list
```

This will display a list of all the configuration settings, including the user
name and email address.

## Editing Configuration

Configuration settings can be changed at any time by running the `git config`
command with the desired values. For example, to change the user name and email
address, the following commands can be run:

```shell
git config --global user.name "Bob"
git config --global user.email "bob@example.com"
```

Editing configuration can also be done by running following config editing
command:

```shell
git config --global --edit
```

Again, the `--global` flag ensures that these settings apply to all repositories
on the system. If it is required to set different user name, email address, or
any other settings for a specific repository, this can be done by running the
same commands without the `--global` flag while being inside that repository.

Another possible way to edit the configuration is to edit the Git configuration
file directly. The global configuration file is located at `~/.gitconfig` on
Linux and macOS, and at `%USERPROFILE%\.gitconfig` on Windows for global
settings. Each repository also has its own configuration file located at
`.git/config` within the repository directory for repository-specific settings.

It is important to note that changes made to the configuration file directly
will not be reflected in the output of `git config --list` until the file is
saved.

<blockquote class="prompt-tip" markdown="1">

**TIP**

Check [**Commands Cheat Sheet**](/posts/git-commands-cheat-sheet/) for more
information about Git commands and configuration options.

</blockquote>

## Hello (Initializing a Repository)

To start using Git for version control, a new repository needs to be
initialized. This can be done by navigating to the project directory in the
terminal and running the following command:

```shell
git init
```

This will create a new Git repository in the current directory, allowing to
start tracking changes to the files in the project.

### Example

Here is an example of initializing a new Git repository:

```shell
mkdir hello-world
cd hello-world
git init
```

## Status Check

After initializing a repository, the status of the repository can be checked by
running the following command inside the repository directory:

```shell
git status
```

## Summary

This article provided an introduction to getting started with Git, including
installation, configuration, and initializing a repository. With these basics in
place, it is now possible to start using Git for version control. In the next
articles, some fundamental scenarios will be covered.
